HELP-71 - achraf-pgss-slow-query-HELP-71 (#851)
aiven/devportal: docs/products/postgresql/howto/identify-and-fix-pg-slow-queries.rst

Identify and fix PostgreSQL® slow queries 

> ===========================

Reviewer: The bar under a title should be longer than the title itself, otherwise Vale might complain

```suggestion
===================================================
```

PostgreSQL® allows you to keep track of queries with certain performance metrics and statistics, which comes in handy when identifying slow queries.

> While using Aiven for PostgreSQL®, you can check the Query Statistics tab for your service in the Aiven Console to identify queries that take too long to run.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While using Aiven for PostgreSQL®, you can check the Query Statistics tab for your service in the `Aiven Console <https://console.aiven.io/>`_ to identify queries that take too long to run.
```

Under the hood, the Query Statistics tab uses the `pg_stat_statements extension <https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/pgstatstatements.html>`_, a module that provides a means for tracking the planning and execution statistics of all SQL statements executed by your PostgreSQL® server, to provide you with the basic information that would be useful for identifying slow queries.

> Query Statistics

Reviewer: We use sentence case for titles :) 

```suggestion
Query statistics
```

'''''''''

These are the entries provided by the Query Statistics which are deduced via the pg_stat_statements:

==================      =======================================================================
Column Type                Description
==================      =======================================================================
``Query``               Text of a representative statement
``Rows``                Total number of rows retrieved or affected by the statement
``Calls``               Number of times the statement was executed
``Min (ms)``            Minimum time spent executing the statement, in milliseconds
``Max (ms)``            Maximum time spent executing the statement, in milliseconds
``Mean (ms)``           Mean time spent executing the statement, in milliseconds
``Stddev (ms)``         Population standard deviation of time spent executing the statement, in milliseconds
``Total (ms)``          Total time spent executing the statement, in milliseconds
==================      =======================================================================

> However, creating custom queries using the ``pg_stat_statements`` yourself and leveraging all of `pg_stat_statements' view column types <https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/pgstatstatements.html>`_ it offers might be something that helps you with your investigation use case.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can also create custom queries using the ``pg_stat_statements`` yourself and leveraging all of  the `available column types <https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/pgstatstatements.html>`_ to help your use-case investigation.
```

Pre-requisites
'''''''''

> To use ``pg_stat_statements``, you'll need the pg_stat_statements extension already created which is within the :doc:`../reference/list-of-extensions` approved list, which can be done via the following ``CREATE EXTENSION`` command::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The ``pg_stat_statements`` extension is :doc:`supported in Aiven for PostgreSQL <../reference/list-of-extensions>`, and can be enabled with the following ``CREATE EXTENSION`` command::
```

  CREATE EXTENSION pg_stat_statements;

> Discovering Slow Queries

Reviewer: Again sentence case
```suggestion
Discovering slow queries
```

'''''''''
You can run the following command to display the ``pg_stat_statements`` view::

   \d pg_stat_statements;
   

> .. image:: /images/products/postgresql/pg-stat-statements-view-display.png

Reviewer: Instead of the image of the output, I believe we can simply copy-paste the output itself in a code block with code type text

   :alt: Screenshot of the pg_stat_statements view display
.. Tip::

    The following output is from PostgreSQL® ``V13``, on older versions you might find different column names such as previously ``max_time`` which is now ``max_exec_time``, always refer to the PostgreSQL® official documentation with the version you are using for accurate column matching.
    
You can come up with your own query to help you analyze relevant information about your recently run queries.

> Here is an example query that use the view to display relevant information about some previously run queries that some of them are relatively slow.

Reviewer: I would add a title like "Example ``pg_stat_statements`` query" and reshape the phrase as following
```suggestion
The following SQL uses the ``pg_stat_statements`` view to display relevant information about the previously run queries that might be slow.
```

> This query is inspired by `this <https://github.com/heroku/heroku-pg-extras/blob/ece431777dd34ff6c2a8dfb790b24db99f114165/commands/outliers.js>`_ implementation, it reformats the ``calls`` column and deduces the ``prop_exec_time`` and ``sync_io_time``::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The SQL is inspired by `this GitHub repository <https://github.com/heroku/heroku-pg-extras/blob/ece431777dd34ff6c2a8dfb790b24db99f114165/commands/outliers.js>`_, it reformats the ``calls`` column and deduces the ``prop_exec_time`` and ``sync_io_time``::
```

    It is possible to discards gathered statistics so far by ``pg_stat_statements`` by using the following command::
        
        SELECT pg_stat_statements_reset()

SQL queries having high I/O activity
----------------------
::

    SELECT userid::regrole, dbid, query,queryid,mean_time/1000 as mean_time_seconds 
    FROM pg_stat_statements
    ORDER by (blk_read_time+blk_write_time) DESC
    LIMIT 10;

Top time consuming queries
----------------------
::

    SELECT userid::regrole, dbid, query ,calls, total_time/1000 as total_time_seconds ,min_time/1000 as min_time_seconds,max_time/1000 as max_time_seconds,mean_time/1000 as mean_time_seconds
    FROM pg_stat_statements
    ORDER by mean_time desc
    LIMIT 10;

Queries with high memory usage
----------------------
::

    SELECT userid::regrole, dbid, queryid,query
    FROM pg_stat_statements 
    ORDER by (shared_blks_hit+shared_blks_dirtied) DESC limit 10;

When you have identified slow queries, you can inspect the query plan and execution using `EXPLAIN ANALYZE <https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/using-explain.html>`_ to see if you need to add any missing indexes or restructure your schema to improve the performance.

> Common slow queries optimizations

Reviewer: I believe this should go into another article titled "Optimise slow queries"
